Add post on considerations when superseding bpmodels with epichains (#362)
epiverse-trace/epiverse-trace.github.io: posts/superseding-bpmodels/index.qmd

---
title: "Key considerations for superseding an R package"
subtitle: "The example of epichains and bpmodels"
author:
  - name: "James Mba Azam"
    orcid: "https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5782-7330"

> date: "2023-11-22"

Author: ```suggestion
date: "2025-01-24"
```

categories: [lifecycles, R, R package, software design]
format:
  html:
    toc: true
execute: 
  cache: true
---

```{r, echo = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  cache = TRUE,
  message = FALSE
)
```

Most of our work in Epiverse TRACE involves either writing a package from scratch or adopting an existing package that has its own capacity for maintenance. In such cases, decision-making during development is guided by internal policies, blueprints, and established workflows. However, a less common scenario for us has been taking over the maintenance of an existing package—a situation we recently encountered with {bpmodels}.

> In this post, I want to share some considerations and lessons learned from maintaining {bpmodels}, originally developed by @sbfnk, and the decision to supersede it with {epichains}. The aim is not to prescribe rigid rules but to spark a conversation about best practices and alternative approaches.

Author: ```suggestion
In this post, I want to share some considerations and lessons learned from maintaining {bpmodels}, originally developed by Prof. Sebastian Funk at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and the decision to supersede it with {epichains}. The aim is not to prescribe rigid rules but to spark a conversation about best practices and alternative approaches.
```

> One of the first considerations was the scope of the package. When maintaining or reimagining a package, it’s crucial to assess its scope and identify opportunities for refinement. For example, in the R ecosystem, some packages have evolved significantly over time to better align with user needs. {plyr} was split into {dplyr} for data frames and {purrr} for lists, reflecting more specialized functionality. Similarly, {reshape} evolved into {reshape2} and later into {tidyr}, with each iteration simplifying and improving upon its predecessor. Another example is the migration of {ggmissing} into the more generalized tool {naniar}. For {bpmodels}, we redefined the scope by introducing {epichains} as a more specialized tool for epidemic chain modeling, incorporating improved features and workflows.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the first considerations was the scope of the package. When maintaining or reimagining a package, assessing its scope and identifying opportunities for refinement is crucial. For example, some packages have evolved significantly in the R ecosystem to better align with user needs. {plyr} was split into {dplyr} for data frames and {purrr} for lists, reflecting more specialized functionality. Similarly, {reshape} evolved into {reshape2} and later into {tidyr}, with each iteration simplifying and improving upon its predecessor. Another example is the migration of {ggmissing} into the more generalized tool {naniar}. For {bpmodels}, we redefined the scope by introducing {epichains} with a unified simulation framework (existing as two functions previously) and function signature as well as underlying classes that allowed interoperability with existing tools such as [epicontacts](https://www.repidemicsconsortium.org/epicontacts/) and soon, [epiparameter](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epiparameter/).
```

---
title: "Key considerations for retiring/superseding an R package"
subtitle: "A reflection on the example of epichains and bpmodels"
author:
  - name: "James Mba Azam"
    orcid: "0000-0001-5782-7330"
  - name: "Sebastian Funk"
    orcid: "0000-0002-2842-3406"
date: "2025-01-24"
categories: [software lifecycles, R, R package, software design, DOI]
format:
  html:
    toc: true
execute: 
  cache: true
---

```{r, echo = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  cache = TRUE,
  message = FALSE
)
```

> Most of our work in Epiverse TRACE involves either developing an R package from scratch or adopting and maintaining an existing R package. In the former case, decision-making during development is guided by internal policies documented in the [Epiverse-TRACE blueprints](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/blueprints/). However, a less common scenario for us has been taking over the maintenance of an existing package — a situation we recently encountered with the [`{bpmodels}`](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) R package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of our work in Epiverse TRACE involves either developing an R package from scratch or adopting and maintaining an existing R package. In the former case, decision-making during development is guided by internal policies documented in the [Epiverse-TRACE blueprints](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/blueprints/). However, a less common scenario for us has been taking on the maintenance of an existing package — a situation we recently encountered with the [`{bpmodels}`](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) R package.
```
minor but "taking over" sounds a bit hostile to me

> In this post, I want to share some considerations and lessons learned from maintaining {bpmodels}, originally developed by Prof. Sebastian Funk at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and the decision to retire/supersede it with {epichains}. The aim is not to prescribe rigid rules but to spark a conversation about good enough practices and alternative approaches that the R developer community has used or would like to be used more widely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, I want to share some considerations and lessons learned from maintaining {bpmodels}, originally developed by Sebastian Funk at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (with contributions by Zhian Kamvar and Flavio Finger), and the decision to retire/supersede it with {epichains}. The aim is not to define strict rules but to spark a conversation about good enough practices and alternative approaches that the R developer community has used or would like to be used more widely.
```

One thing is clear from the examples on scope changes - they often lead to name changes. Another important decision was whether to rebrand the package with a new name. A new name can signal a fresh approach and address limitations of the original package. The most popular example is the renaming of `{ggplot}` to [`{ggplot2}`](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/index.html). Other examples include renaming {reshape} to {reshape2} and {tidyr}. In our case, we decided to fork the original [`{bpmodels}`](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) repository under Epiverse-TRACE and maintain the old package to avoid breaking scripts that rely on it. At the same time, we introduced {epichains} as the successor. The name reflects the fact that it is a package for analysing *epidemiological transmission chains*.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

A second key consideration is the plans that the original package author(s) may have had and their views on any future changes. In our case this was fairly straightforward because the maintainer of the original package was fully involved in the refactoring. Another package author who had made substantial contributions could be reached and approval sought. More generally, however, bringing all package authors on board with things like scope change, name change etc. is an important step in taking on maintenance of a package and one that must not be neglected.

```

> We also had to consider whether to archive {bpmodels} or allow it to coexist with {epichains}. We decided to keep {bpmodels} accessible to sustain the reproducibility of existing code using the package. The package was moved back to the [epiforecasts GitHub organisation](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) where it originated from. We, however, added a lifecycle badge to communicate the package’s retired status and text in the README about our plans for low maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also had to consider whether to archive {bpmodels} or allow it to coexist with {epichains}. We decided to keep {bpmodels} accessible to sustain the reproducibility of existing code using the package. The package was moved back to the [epiforecasts GitHub organisation](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) where it originated from. We, however, added a [lifecycle badge](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/reference/badge.html) to communicate the package’s retired status and text in the README about our plans for low maintenance.
```

Another technical consideration was how to handle version control and commit histories. When forking a package, it’s important to decide whether to retain the commit history. Options include squashing the history to start with a clean slate, which risks losing visibility of past contributions, or tagging the HEAD commit of the original repository and building from there. For {bpmodels}, we chose to keep the history intact to retain the contributions of its original authors.

[Semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) was another key decision point. Since `{epichains}` was not going to be available immediately but would be developed in the open (on GitHub), we needed to consider how to communicate that to potential users. We decided to start at version `0.0.0.9999` to signal an experimental and unstable phase[^3] while iterating on features.

> Throughout this process, we drew inspiration from various sources. Hadley Wickham’s reasoning for {reshape2} as a reboot of {reshape} and Nicholas Tierney's reason for renaming `{ggmissing}` to `{naniar}` were helpful. Additionally, a talk at UseR! 2024 entitled ["retiring packages with extensive reverse dependencies"](https://userconf2024.sched.com/event/1c90V/r-evolution-the-retirement-of-r-packages-with-many-reverse-dependencies-edzer-pebesma-university-of-muenster-roger-bivand-norwegian-school-of-economics?iframe=no&;w=100%25&;sidebar=yes&;bg=no) offered practical advice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout this process, we drew inspiration from various sources. Hadley Wickham’s reasoning for {reshape2} as a reboot of {reshape} and Nicholas Tierney's reason for renaming `{ggmissing}` to `{naniar}` were helpful. Additionally, a talk at UseR! 2024 entitled ["retiring packages with extensive reverse dependencies"](https://userconf2024.sched.com/event/1c90V/r-evolution-the-retirement-of-r-packages-with-many-reverse-dependencies-edzer-pebesma-university-of-muenster-roger-bivand-norwegian-school-of-economics) offered practical advice.
```

> This transition has raised several questions for the community. How do you decide whether to supersede or deprecate a package? What strategies have worked for maintaining backward compatibility while introducing new tools? How do you document and communicate major changes to users?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This transition has raised several questions for the community. How do you decide whether to supersede or deprecate a package? What strategies have worked for maintaining backward compatibility while introducing new tools? How do you document and communicate major changes to users? How is all of this done while appropriately crediting past contributions and retain discoverability and citation/use tracking.
```

---
title: "Key considerations for retiring/superseding an R package"
subtitle: "A reflection on the example of epichains and bpmodels"
author:
  - name: "James Mba Azam"
    orcid: "0000-0001-5782-7330"
  - name: "Sebastian Funk"
    orcid: "0000-0002-2842-3406"
date: "2025-01-24"
categories: [software lifecycles, R, R package, software design, DOI]
format:
  html:
    toc: true
execute: 
  cache: true
---

```{r, echo = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  cache = TRUE,
  message = FALSE
)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could you please remove this entirely and delete the contents of `index_cache/` since it doesn't seem that you're making use of code in the rest of the post?

Reviewer 3: Resolved in 56239a32ccb65c81afe9fedf66a4e2a8822ca68d

We also had to consider whether to archive {bpmodels} or allow it to coexist with {epichains}. We decided to keep {bpmodels} accessible to sustain the reproducibility of existing code using the package. The package was moved back to the [epiforecasts GitHub organisation](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) where it originated from. We, however, added a [lifecycle badge](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/reference/badge.html) to communicate the package’s retired status and text in the README about our plans for low maintenance.

Another technical consideration was how to handle version control and commit histories. When forking a package, it’s important to decide whether to retain the commit history. Options include squashing the history to start with a clean slate, which risks losing visibility of past contributions, or tagging the HEAD commit of the original repository and building from there. For {bpmodels}, we chose to keep the history intact to retain the contributions of its original authors.

> [Semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) was another key decision point. Since `{epichains}` was not going to be available immediately but would be developed in the open (on GitHub), we needed to consider how to communicate that to potential users. We decided to start at version `0.0.0.9999` to signal an experimental and unstable phase[^3] while iterating on features.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to link to the relevant issues each time so that curious readers can go through the whole discussion?

e.g., https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epichains/issues/32

Author: Would it be better as a hyperlink or a footnote? I'm not sure.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure either. I keep hesitating between both always. In this case, my first intuition would be a link but I don't feel strongly either :shrug:

> Throughout this process, we drew inspiration from various sources. Hadley Wickham’s reasoning for {reshape2} as a reboot of {reshape} and Nicholas Tierney's reason for renaming `{ggmissing}` to `{naniar}` were helpful. Additionally, a talk at UseR! 2024 entitled ["retiring packages with extensive reverse dependencies"](https://userconf2024.sched.com/event/1c90V/r-evolution-the-retirement-of-r-packages-with-many-reverse-dependencies-edzer-pebesma-university-of-muenster-roger-bivand-norwegian-school-of-economics) offered practical advice.

Reviewer 2: Can you link to Hadley's and Nick's reasons in this paragraph as well? I skipped the footnotes initially and wondered where I could read about these reasons.

One thing is clear from the examples on scope changes - they often lead to name changes. Another important decision was whether to rebrand the package with a new name. A new name can signal a fresh approach and address limitations of the original package. The most popular example is the renaming of `{ggplot}` to [`{ggplot2}`](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/index.html). Other examples include renaming {reshape} to {reshape2} and {tidyr}. In our case, we decided to fork the original [`{bpmodels}`](https://epiforecasts.github.io/bpmodels/) repository under Epiverse-TRACE and maintain the old package to avoid breaking scripts that rely on it. At the same time, we introduced {epichains} as the successor. The name reflects the fact that it is a package for analysing *epidemiological transmission chains*.

> A second key consideration is the plans that the original package author(s) may have had and their views on any future changes. In our case this was fairly straightforward because the maintainer of the original package was fully involved in the refactoring. Another package author who had made substantial contributions could be reached and approval sought. More generally, however, bringing all package authors on board with things like scope change, name change etc. is an important step in taking on maintenance of a package and one that must not be neglected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second key consideration are the plans that the original package author(s) may have had and their views on any future changes. In our case this was fairly straightforward because the maintainer of the original package was fully involved in the refactoring. Another package author who had made substantial contributions could be reached and gave approval. More generally, however, bringing all package authors on board with, e.g., changes in scope and name is an important step in taking on maintenance of a package and one that should not be neglected.
```

[Semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) was another key decision point. Since `{epichains}` was not going to be available immediately but would be developed in the open (on GitHub), we needed to consider how to communicate that to potential users. We decided to start at version `0.0.0.9999` to signal an experimental and unstable phase[^3] while iterating on features.

Throughout this process, we drew inspiration from various sources. Hadley Wickham’s reasoning for {reshape2} as a reboot of {reshape} and Nicholas Tierney's reason for renaming `{ggmissing}` to `{naniar}` were helpful. Additionally, a talk at UseR! 2024 entitled ["retiring packages with extensive reverse dependencies"](https://userconf2024.sched.com/event/1c90V/r-evolution-the-retirement-of-r-packages-with-many-reverse-dependencies-edzer-pebesma-university-of-muenster-roger-bivand-norwegian-school-of-economics) offered practical advice.

> This transition has raised several questions for the community. How do you decide whether to supersede or deprecate a package? What strategies have worked for maintaining backward compatibility while introducing new tools? How do you document and communicate major changes to users? How is all of this done while appropriately crediting past contributions and retain discoverability and citation/use tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This transition has raised several questions for the community. How do you decide whether to supersede or deprecate a package? What strategies have worked for maintaining backward compatibility while introducing new tools? How do you document and communicate major changes to users? How is all of this done while appropriately crediting past contributions and retain discoverability and citation/use tracking?
```
